---
layout: post
title:  "Tick Tock"
date:   2014-06-11 00:00:00
categories: tumblr post 
---
Yesterday, I spent an hour or two looking for a book I read when I was younger. It was about two kids who are visited by a third one from the future. They end up time-traveling and saving the world as we know it. I don't really remember the rest of the plot, but the thing that has stuck with me through the years is a phrase in the book. I didn't end up finding the book, but I still think that it's a strange sentiment:

**"The past is unchangeable. The future is unknowable. And the present never happens."**

In part, it refers to [Novikov's self-consistency principle](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Novikov_self-consistency_principle). The past, no matter what you do, will stay in the past. Even if time-travel were possible, changes will ultimately right themselves. A popular analogy that I've heard is that the currents of the river won't change even if you throw in a pebble. This begs the question of "if you throw in something larger than a pebble, couldn't that change the course of the river?" It happens in the physical world. We dam up streams and reroute rivers. If the analogy were to hold, then couldn't a sufficiently important event being changed cause a change in the timeline. Like in [X-Men: Days of Future Past](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X-Men:_Days_of_Future_Past) (there are probably better examples, but I saw the movie recently), where they go back in time to make sure they were never there hiding before the Sentinels come. I guess the question becomes how encompassing is this river of time? What is our scale and scope? It's like a different paradox I heard once about if a god is almighty, can this god create a rock so heavy that the god cannot lift it. In the moment, small things do make small changes, but who knows if things ultimately correct themselves? Is there a correct path?

The second part describes this path as being unknowable, the malleability of the flow of time. Our actions can potentially affect the actions of ourselves and others in the future. Is there actually one direction that we are going or are there many? Is our destiny and fate pre-ordained or do we actually have free choice? I remember reading some science-fiction books and a few discussions with friends about a deterministic and a non-deterministic future. It's like Newtonian v. Einsteinian paradigms (from a different [book series](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chronicles_of_Chaos_(fantasy_trilogy)) I read). Newtonian physics is deterministic because say theoretically you could know and compute the position and velocity of every single atom in existence. If that were the case, you could predict the future because you know all the variables. Einsteinian physics is probabilistic. Things could or could not happen, depending on observations and a whole bunch of other factors. There's no way to know the future because it's all probability based. In both regards, it still comes back to being unknowable because trying to keep track of all the atoms in existence would require something outside of existence, but that in itself is a conundrum. And probability is just that, a chance. No matter how small, it could happen, whether it does or not simply depends.

The final section is perhaps the most interesting. There's so much talk about ["living in the moment" and "living in the present."](http://bit.ly/1lInHIu) I, myself, am one of those people who try to throw themselves into the "now" as much as I can. Whether good or bad, it only matters that I am truly experiencing the situation. But the quote implies that the present doesn't exist; that it "never happens." I remember the way it was described in the book as trying to describe a single moment. If you say the word "now," no matter how quickly or slowly you say the word, it is already in the past. In the very act of trying to create the present, it is already in the past. The moment that we are all experiencing is simply the intersection of the unknowable becoming the unchangeable.

Having a childhood full of science-fiction and fantasy novels has probably given me a skewed and far too idealistic perception of the world. I believe that it is something that I would hate to lose. There are so many heroes and heroines trying to save the world, so many things that can and could be changed.  I enjoy thinking that small actions can influence the many whether [good](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pay_it_forward) or [bad](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Butterfly_effect) (I would say my second example is actually more of a neutral). I guess the only relevance this paragraph has to the rest of the post is that I think that dwelling too much in the past or worrying too much about the future or trying too hard to live in the present are all just that: too much. All I really ever want to do is just live and experience what the world has to offer and see what I have to offer back. There are so many little things that we can learn and do and create. Sometimes even the little things may seem like too much, but it's a place to start perhaps?

There's a story about starfish that I would encourage everyone to think about. I've put a number of links in this post, but I think this one is particularly easy to find, so I'll leave that in your hands.

I've always wanted to start a blog. I suppose that graduating from college has somehow magically given me more time to do the things that I want to do. I'll try my best to post regularly as I think about my life. Perhaps if you're reading this, you could remind me every once in a while.

Side note: if there's any chance that you'll be in St. Louis in November, you should [sign up for Dance Marathon](http://dm.wustl.edu)! It's a really amazing cause that raises money for the kids and their families. There's an alumni team if you're interested.